Limit RCID state (#3547)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

failures, as the issuing endpoint might be unable to continue using the
connection IDs with the active connection.

> An endpoint SHOULD limit the state it commits to retiring connection IDs using
> RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID by limiting the number of connection IDs that it tracks for
> retirement to at least twice the active_connection_id_limit. An endpoint MUST

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An endpoint SHOULD limit the number of connection IDs for which it has issued an outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID to at least twice the active_connection_id limit.
```

Reviewer: I tried to rewrite the text to make it clearer, but in doing so, I realize that the original text is unclear.

Ignoring the details it says: "It should limit value X to no less than Y."

But I can achieve this by not limiting it at all, which is not the advice we seem to want to give. Is what you are trying to say:

1. There should be a fixed limit.
1. It should be no lower than Y.

What's the rationale for > 2xactive_connection_id.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think that this is a clearer formulation.  I've taken this and rewritten to:

> An endpoint SHOULD limit the state it commits to retiring connection IDs.  An endpoint SHOULD allow for sending and tracking a number of RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames of at least twice the active_connection_id_limit.

These are both recommendations only.  There are reasons why you might not care for these limits.

The 2x is to allow for a combination of you deciding to retire all active connection IDs and the peer asking you to retire all active connection IDs.  If you allow for that much, you will never encounter a situation where the combination of both peers asking for retirement will cause RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID to be dropped or delayed.

That said, this works if you only track 1 RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID at a time, it just might be slow.

Author: @ekr, "outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID" implies the frame is actually in flight, which may not be the case for state management reasons. I think @martinthomson 's edit resolves this problem, so I'm going to commit that one. Hopefully it addresses your concerns.

Author: If @ekr is happy I'll resolve this sub-thread.

> RETIRE_CONNECTION_IDs SHOULD be at least the active_connection_id_limit. An

Reviewer 3: How about something like: _In order to allow a peer to retire all previously issued connection IDs while an endpoint waits for some RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames to be acknowledged, the limit on the number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_IDs SHOULD be at least the active_connection_id_limit plus the number of retirements that the endpoint might initiate at one time._

Reviewer 2: I don't think that is sufficient or necessary.

1. sufficiency: an adversary can send a long sequence of NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames with seq: N and rpt: N-1.  This is both entirely legitimate and completely outside the spirit of the protocol.

2. necessity: if you track min(unacknowledged RCID) and max(RPT) then you can track as few RCID frames as you like.  It might be nice if people used active_connection_id_limit*2, but that number only optimizes for a complete turnover of connection IDs every round trip.  It is an otherwise arbitrary number.  I don't think that we need to optimize for that case.

The only problem arises with this approach is when that gap widens more than you would like.  At which point you can throw down a CONNECTION_CLOSE and walk away.

Author: It occurred to me that we might be talking about two entirely different ideas.

1) The "Maximum number of outstanding RCIDs" is a momentary restriction. I might send only 10 at a time, or whatever, but eventually I will send all of the RCIDs that the protocol required before any of these PRs.

2) I need only send N RCIDs at a time, and can assume all other (earlier) sequence numbers have been de facto retired.

If my limit is 10 and I get 100 NCIDs that increment RPT by 1 in rapid succession, option (1) would have us send all 100 RCIDs over 10 RTTs, assuming no loss. option (2) would have us send 10 and be done with it. Which are we describing here?

Reviewer 2: I definitely mean option 1.  Which leads to eventual resolution.

Note that if we also take Ian's #3550, then none of these RCID frames are necessary.  You only use RCID for discretionary use (where you use a connection ID and find you no longer need it).  That's why I think that's a nice addition.

Reviewer 3: I agree that we do not need to care about sufficiency.

> if you track min(unacknowledged RCID) and max(RPT) then you can track as few RCID frames as you like. It might be nice if people used active_connection_id_limit*2, but that number only optimizes for a complete turnover of connection IDs every round trip.

This observation is what I disagree with. The intent of the change I proposed right above is to allow an endpoint to retire all the CID at once, without being concerned about the peer losing track of some sequence numbers carried by CID frames already inflight, or the peer considering the endpoint to be doing something malicious.

Assuming that an endpoint that retires CIDs track each of the RCID frame it sends, the safe number is _active_connection_id_limit_ (the number of CIDs that might be retired at once by RPT) plus _the number of retirements that that endpoint might initiate at once_.

To give a specific example, consider the following case.
* A client, with max_connection_id_limit = 2, is using CID<sub>0</sub> for the main path, and is probing a new path using CID<sub>1</sub>.
* Server sends NCID(CID<sub>2</sub>, RPT=2), NCID(CID<sub>3</sub>, RPT=2).
* Client receives these NCID frames, and assigns CID<sub>2</sub> to the main path, CID<sub>3</sub> to the path being probed. The client sends RCID(CID<sub>0</sub>), RCID(CID<sub>1</sub>).
* Before receiving ACK for the two RCID frames, the client decides to abandon the path being probed. It needs to send RCID(CID<sub>2</sub>).

At this point, the client is required to track the flight of RCID frames carrying *three* CIDs. And it has to make sure that RCID(CID<sub>2</sub>) reaches the peer, otherwise it would not receive a CID that substitutes CID<sub>2</sub>.

The recommendation in this PR now (i.e. "the limit on the number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_IDs SHOULD be at least the active_connection_id_limit") fails to cover this case.

Reviewer 3: @martinthomson 
> Note that if we also take Ian's #3550, then none of these RCID frames are necessary. You only use RCID for discretionary use (where you use a connection ID and find you no longer need it). That's why I think that's a nice addition.

I think I agree with this. Status quo is just confusing, as it requires endpoints to send RCID frames for the retired CIDs they have received, but does not require the frames to be sent for the CIDs that they receive afterwards.

This means that from the viewpoint of the endpoint that requests retirement, it cannot assume that it would see RCID frames for the CIDs that it has requested retirement, but in most cases it would see them. This could turn into a trap in some implementations.

I agree that we should adopt #3550, so that we would never assume to see RCID for the CIDs that we request retirement.

Reviewer 2: I see what you mean by the CID<sub>2</sub> example, but my counter would be that you wouldn't retire that connection ID because you were still busy working through the previous set of retirements.  (This assumes that you don't or can't start to retire CID<sub>2</sub> before being told to retire the others.)

The problem with discretionary retirement is that it won't be contiguous in the same way that Retire Prior To has to be, so you potentially have a patchwork of connection IDs that are variously valid, in use, unused, or retired.  You can use run-length encoding to reduce state somewhat, but there is no easy way to compress this state commitment.

But at least you can avoid the costs of retiring stuff that you are forced to retire.  That's all I was worried about.  Costs of discretionary activities are something people just have to factor in.

Reviewer 3: > I see what you mean by the CID<sub>2</sub> example, but my counter would be that you wouldn't retire that connection ID because you were still busy working through the previous set of retirements. (This assumes that you don't or can't start to retire CID<sub>2</sub> before being told to retire the others.)

Yeah I think my view is that it is hard to implement such behavior without having additional state, because the peer can request an endpoint to retire CIDs. You can delay the start to retire CID<sub>2</sub>. But to do that, you need to have a delayed slot (i.e. state).

> Costs of discretionary activities are something people just have to factor in.

I agree. My complaint is that the recommendation of "at least active_connection_id_limit" is incorrect.

As we seem to be converging on adopting #3550, I've posted an example that does not involve the use of RPT in https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/issues/3509#issuecomment-606408197. I posted it on the issue as I think it is a part of the problem statement rather than the solution.

Author: Alright, I implemented this PR this morning and it's quite lightweight. Moreover, it's fully interoperable with draft-27.

#3550 is a much more drastic change in behavior that will break interoperability. draft-27 NCID senders will wait for RCIDs that will never come. If we're going to make a breaking change I'd just as soon we go to #3553 and have a comprehensive solution that is less likely to end up with corner cases.

Reviewer 4: Q: At what threshold did you close the connection?  2 * active_connection_id_limit?  Or did you not close the connection and instead do something else?

Author: So we're limiting in-flight to 2*(the limit), which for us is currently 4. I set a very large threshold to tear down the connection -- currently, if highest_rpt is 100 more than least_unacked. That makes it exceedingly unlikely weird ack loss cases are going to bring me down, but I can tear down the connection if it gets ridiculous. There's really no difference in state between it being 50, 100, or 1000 -- it just means the client will get application data a little slower.

Reviewer 3: @martinduke Thank you for sharing your experience.

Could you please clarify why you have two limits? Are you limiting the number of inflight RCID frames to 4, even though you retain state of up to 100 CIDs to be retired?

I'm curious, because that's not something I would expect as an outcome of this PR. My read of the text proposed in the PR has been that we assume that a RCID frame becomes "outstanding" when an endpoint decides to (or being instructed to) retire a CID.

IIUC, what we need to do is limit the amount of state that the endpoint retains. Number of RCID frames sent at one time does not really matter, as it is bound by the CWND size.

Author: @kazuho. I initially read "outstanding" as meaning "intended to retire", just like you, but further up in the thread @martinthomson said that's not what he meant. And anyway, I soon saw that that interpretation is equally easy to implement and more compliant with the existing spec.

First, assume the endpoint never retires a CID voluntarily. I just have to store the active CIDs. The retired CIDs require only two state variables:
- highest retire prior to (highest_rpt)
- lowest RCID seqnum unacked (lowest_rua)

Each packet records the highest seqnum retired because it always retires everything below that, as you'll see below.

`process_ncid():
    if (retire_prior_to <= highest_rpt)
        quit;
    if (retire_prior_to > lowest_rua + 100)
       abort;
    if (highest_rpt == lowest_rua)
        highest_rpt = retire_prior_to
        send_rcid_pkt()
    else
        highest_rpt = retire_prior_to

send_rcid_pkt():
    limit = MIN(highest_rpt, lowest_rua + 2 * active_cid_limit)
    for i = lowest_rua : limit
        send_rcid(i)
    pkt.max_seq_num = limit

process_ack(pkt):
    lowest_rua = MAX(lowest_rua, pkt.max_seq_num + 1) 
    if (lowest_rua < highest_rpt) 
        send_rcid_pkt()`

If I have a backlog of CIDs to retire, I will clear 2 * active_cid_limit of them each RTT assuming no losses. This number is essentially arbitrary but should definitely fit in a single packet. 100 is an arbitrarily large number just in case the client is being malicious. Again, you don't want it to be so small that unlucky packet losses cause a connection error, but beyond that any number is fine.

If we are retiring CIDs voluntarily, we'll have to keep some extra state. We can put them in a special data structure that send_rcid_pkt also checks, but will definitely be finite as it is controlled locally. If I retire them in sequence, nothing stops me from increasing highest_rpt even though I never received it in an NCID frame, and therefore using the mechanism above.

***

The nice thing about this design is that we are fully compliant with the draft-27 language in every way, except that the RCID frames are not always sent *immediately*. #3553 is a cleaner design but this one has essentially no impact on the peer at all if it's implementing -27.

Reviewer 3: @martinduke Thank you for the clarification. I now understand the intent. I think that we should adjust the text in this PR.

To mitigate the attacks being discussed, what we need to do is cap the amount of state used for retaining the CIDs that "are intended to be retired." While an endpoint may restrict the number of RCID frames being sent at one time, that is unrelated to the attack, and therefore I would advocate for removing that requirement (as it is an unnecessary design change).

Speaking of your implementation, what matters is 100. 4 (2 * active_connection_id_limit) is an arbitrary choice unrelated to the attack; my argument is that therefore we do not need to specify that in spec.

Reviewer 3: PS. To avoid the confusion being discussed in the comments right above, I think my preference goes to having something like:

_An adversarial peer can request an endpoint to retain state for an unlimited amount of connection IDs being retired by withholding acknowledgements for the RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames, at the same time sending NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames with updated values in the Retire Prior To fields, or probing and discarding paths repeatedly._

_As a mitigation, endpoints SHOULD limit the amount of state that they retain for retiring the connection IDs. In order to allow a well-behaving peer to request retirement of all the previously issued connection IDs while an endpoint waits for some RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames to be acknowledged,  an endpoint SHOULD be capable of tracking at least the active_connection_id_limit plus the number of retirements that the endpoint might initiate at one time. When the amount of state required for tracking the connection IDs being retired exceeds that limit, an endpoint MAY close the connection with a CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR._

Author: @kazuho I believe my psuedocode indicates that the current version of the PR doesn't add more state for various values of "maximum RCIDs inflight" as long as it's small enough that you can fit it all in one QUIC packet. If the RCIDs are spread over multiple packets inflight then keeping track of RCIDs requires a scoreboard.

The exact threshold to throw an error is indeed not needed in the spec. However @ianswett, rightfully, requested a MAY around the error to set expectations for debugging.

I do think we should change the word "outstanding" to "in flight" just to make it a bit clearer.

Reviewer 4: in flight or unacknowledged would both be fine with me.  One negative of "in flight" is that if you're congestion blocked, you can't yet put the RCID in flight.

Author: unacknowledged is better

Author: "unacknowledged" would also include long-lost packets, technically. I agree with the congestion control observation, but I'm not sure how it impacts the behavior. I'll _always_ withhold RCIDs that are cwnd-blocked; it's a restriction on RCIDs in flight independent of this one.

Reviewer 3: @martinduke I agree that when restricted by CWND, we cannot send a frame. Therefore my view is that it is difficult or confusing to call a frame that is not yet being set as "inflight" or "outstanding." Both words are wrong IMO.

That the reason why my text above talks about "state retained for retiring connection IDs."

> The exact threshold to throw an error is indeed not needed in the spec. However @ianswett, rightfully, requested a MAY around the error to set expectations for debugging.

While I am not against making such a suggestion using MAY in text, if we are to make a suggestion, I think we'd need to be very cautious so that the limit would not be too small.

Author: Perhaps I'm missing something obvious. The endpoint can say "I will only have 10 RCIDs in flight at a time". So if the peer makes me send 20, it'll take me at least 2 RTTs to resolve. Now obviously it can take longer if I don't have enough cwnd, but that's orthogonal to this and no change to the spec. Yes?

I'm not sure why an endpoint would choose a threshold that would result in spurious aborts, but if there's some limit you would suggest I'm happy to add it.

Reviewer 3: > The endpoint can say "I will only have 10 RCIDs in flight at a time".

Yes. That's possible, but having that limitation does not mitigate the attack.

> So if the peer makes me send 20, it'll take me at least 2 RTTs to resolve. Now obviously it can take longer if I don't have enough cwnd, but that's orthogonal to this and no change to the spec.

The attack is that peer might make you send more than 20 or more. And we need to either provide a guidance on when an endpoint can start leaking retirements or close the connection.

However, the only SHOULD being added in this PR is something unrelated to the attack. And the location of the text gives the false impression that the limit in that sentence is the threshold for mitigating the attack.

> the active_connection_id_limit. An endpoint MAY choose to treat having too many

Reviewer 3: For the first two sentences, I think we should better use phrases like "state required to track the CIDs being retired." I also think that we should provide guidance on choosing the limit, which should be greater than active_connection_id_limit (see #3509).

"in flight" is confusing, as people might read it as if it excludes sequence number of retired CIDs that are to be sent but cannot be sent immediately. There is no guarantee that RCID frames for all the sequence numbers to be retired can be sent immediately as the frame is under the control of CC. Note that there would be an incentive for people to consider that "in flight" here excludes those yet to be sent, because is the next setence we talk about "having too many in need of retirement." That gives the impression that "in flight" means something narrower.

Author: it does exclude ones that can't be sent; the point is, even if there is space in the cwnd I can choose to send fewer to simplify the implementation.

Reviewer 3: If it excludes those that can't be sent, then such an endpoint is vulnerable to the attack. Unless the amount of state that is used to track those that can't be sent is bounded. We need to recommend endpoints to limit _this_ state (see https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/3547#discussion_r401984660), not the number of RCID frames sent at once.

> having too many connection IDs in need of retirement as a connection error of

Reviewer: "too many" seems non-specific here. I think we need more detail.

Author: How about "though it MAY choose to treat having more connection IDs in need of retirement than is consistent with a manageable amount of states as a connection error..."?

A number doesn't feel right here, but I'm open to wording suggestions.

Reviewer: Instead of "too many" how about "having connection IDs in need of retirement that exceed this limit..."  or "in excess of this limit". That way we don't have ambiguity about the referent of "too many"

Author: done

> CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR.

Reviewer 3: If we are to suggest that endpoints MAY immediately close the connection (an action that leads to loss of HTTP requests / responses), we should give a specific advice on when it would be safe to do so. The only number we provide in this paragraph is `active_connection_id_limit`, but we agree that it is too small to be used for closing the connection. We should be clear about that.

Author: I'm happy to include whatever minimum you suggest.

Reviewer 2: I could live with saying "at least twice the active_connection_id_limit" in the first sentence.

> An endpoint SHOULD limit the number of in flight RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames
> to bound the necessary state. In order to minimize delay in common situations,
> the limit on the number of in flight RETIRE_CONNECTION_IDs SHOULD be at least
> the active_connection_id_limit. An endpoint MAY choose to treat having too many
> connection IDs in need of retirement as a connection error of type
> CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When retiring a connection ID, an endpoint remembers a sequence number and
maybe a packet number for a RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame.  An endpoint SHOULD
limit the state it commits to remembering connection IDs that need to be
retired to at least twice the active_connection_id_limit. An endpoint MAY
choose to treat having too many connection IDs in need of retirement as a
connection error of type CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR.
```

Reviewer 3: This suggestion looks good to me. I think we might want to clarify why the recommendation is at least twice (e.g., so that endpoints can track retirements it issued and those requested by the peer even under packet loss), but that's merely an editorial preference.

Author: I have received feedback from the list and the editors that "the lag" is the way to go. Unless that consensus is reversed, I believe that @martinthomson 's suggestion is too easily misinterpreted as allowing "the leak".  While I believe this can be fixed, I'll make a new suggestion that might be a better basis to making progress on what now is an editorial problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When retiring a connection ID, an endpoint remembers a sequence number and maybe
a packet number for a RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame.  An endpoint SHOULD limit the
state it commits by limiting the number of connection IDs that it tracks for
retirement to at least twice the active_connection_id_limit. An endpoint MUST
NOT forget a connection ID without retiring it, though MAY choose to treat
having too many connection IDs in need of retirement as a connection error of
type CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR.
```

I think that this is better than including a lot more works.  I've tweaked the last sentence to include a prohibition on forgetting connection IDs.

Reviewer 3: I'm fine with @martinthomson's proposed text. 

It gives a recommendation, and also provides a dedicated error code to be used in such case. When a well-behaving endpoint receives that error code, it can blame that the peer is doing something wrong.

I think that this is the minimal fix that we need to apply, and I think that it is a reasonable way of making progress at late stage. If we are to apply a proper fix, my preference still goes to adopting #3553. It removes the need for "lagging," therefore, provides us having less complexity in the long run, at the cost of requiring a wire-format change.

Endpoints SHOULD NOT issue updates of the Retire Prior To field before receiving

> RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames for the previous update of Retire Prior To.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames that retire all connection IDs indicated by the previous Retire Prior To value.
```

failures, as the issuing endpoint might be unable to continue using the
connection IDs with the active connection.

> An endpoint SHOULD limit the state it commits to retiring connection IDs. An

Reviewer: I feel like "commits to" is unclear. 

Perhaps
"An endpoint should limit the number of connection IDs that it has retired locally and have not yet been acknowledged."

> endpoint SHOULD allow for sending and trackign a number of RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID

Reviewer: ```suggestion
endpoint SHOULD allow for sending and tracking a number of RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID
```

> An endpoint SHOULD limit the
> state it commits to retiring connection IDs using RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID by
> limiting the number of connection IDs that it tracks for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An endpoint SHOULD limit the state it commits to retiring connection IDs
using RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID by limiting the number of connection IDs that it tracks for
```

> When retiring a connection ID, an endpoint remembers a sequence number and maybe
> a packet number for a RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame.  An endpoint SHOULD limit the
> state it commits by limiting the number of connection IDs that it tracks for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An endpoint SHOULD limit the
state it commits to retiring connection IDs using RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID by limiting the number of connection IDs that it tracks for
```

> An endpoint SHOULD limit the
> state it commits to retiring connection IDs using RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID by
> limiting the number of connection IDs that it tracks for
> retirement to at least twice the active_connection_id_limit. An endpoint MUST
> NOT forget a connection ID without retiring it, though MAY choose to treat
> having too many connection IDs in need of retirement as a connection error of
> type CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An endpoint SHOULD limit the state it commits to retiring connection IDs
using RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID by limiting the number of connection IDs that
it tracks for retirement to at least twice the active_connection_id_limit. An
endpoint MUST NOT forget a connection ID without retiring it, though MAY
choose to treat having too many connection IDs in need of retirement as a
connection error of type CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR.
```

failures, as the issuing endpoint might be unable to continue using the
connection IDs with the active connection.

> An endpoint MAY elect to limit the number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID

Reviewer 3: I think this should be a SHOULD.

In case of a client-driven attack using path probes, an innocent server without this type of bound would end up holding infinite amount of state.

Reviewer 4: SHOULD is fine with me.

> An endpoint MAY elect to limit the number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An endpoint SHOULD elect to limit the number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID
```

frames to bound the necessary state. In order to allow a peer to retire all

> previously issued connection IDs, this limit SHOULD be at least the

Reviewer 2: "this limit" here seems a bit non-specific

> previously issued connection IDs, this limit SHOULD be at least the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
previously issued connection IDs, the limit on the number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_IDs SHOULD be at least the
```

> active_connection_id_limit. Within this limit, endpoints SHOULD prioritize

Reviewer 4: I don't think this last sentence is necessary, so I'd be inclined towards removing it.

Author: I'm not sure which one you're referring to.

> sending frames which the peer is least likely to have received.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
active_connection_id_limit.
```

Endpoints SHOULD NOT issue updates of the Retire Prior To field before receiving
RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames for the previous update of Retire Prior To. Doing so
may result in the peer being unwilling to immediately retire all the connection
IDs, if retiring them would cause it to exceed its limit on outstanding

> RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames, as described above.

Reviewer 3: I think that the last sentence is inaccurate. As pointed out in my previous comments (https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/3547#discussion_r399240482), an endpoint might receive a request to retire all the CIDs while it is already in the process of retiring some. In such case, *just* remembering `max_connection_id_limit` CIDs being retired is insufficient.

I think it would be better if we removed the recommendations from these two paragraphs, so that each of them becomes a problem statement, then in a new paragraph describe some of the measures that an endpoint SHOULD toke; e.g.:
* remember max_connection_id_limit CIDs, and also track those below RPT (as suggested by @ianswett in https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/3547#discussion_r399248483)
* remember 2 * max_connection_id_limit

failures, as the issuing endpoint might be unable to continue using the
connection IDs with the active connection.

> An endpoint MAY elect to only send or retransmit RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An endpoint MAY elect to only send RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames
```

Author: I really wanted to make it clear that an endpoint might have sent RCID but choose to abandon retransmission if lost, based on this criterion. I may not have worded it well, but I don't think your suggestion fixes it.

Reviewer 4: We typically don't talk about retransmissions, so this read oddly to me.

Author: Would it be better say just "send", and then have a separate sentence like "an endpoint MAY abandon retransmission of frames retiring sequence numbers that meet these conditions."?

Author: your new text solves this problem, thanks

with sequence numbers greater than or equal to the highest Retire Prior To field

> received minus its advertised active_connection_id_limit. This bounds the

Reviewer 3: I'm afraid this advice might be inadequate.

It is possible to mount attacks without using Retire Prior To (see https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/issues/3509#issuecomment-597970501), and therefore the defense should rather not depend on the value of Retire Prior To.

I think it would be better to state that:
* An endpoint SHOULD limit the number of unacknowledged RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames (or the count of sequence numbers contained in those frames) that the endpoint tracks.
* That limitation SHOULD be no less than 2 * max_connection_id_limit.

I think that was what @martinthomson had in mind when he wrote https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/issues/3509#issuecomment-597425775.

`2 * max_connection_id_limit` is a better ballpark figure than `max_connection_id_limit`, because it gives some confidence to the issuer of CIDs that it can issue a new CID immediately when it receives RCID, without the fear of that causing some state to be lost in the peer.

Author: I guess we're going to have this discussion in two places, but I'm not sure the non-RPT case is a valid threat model.

I am a little concerned with your formulation that the endpoint could make bad choices about which RCIDs it decides to stick with. For example, we might never increase RPT and for some reason have a low sequence number that sticks around and is still being used. The server really better actually send the RCID.

I'm happy to haggle about the exact threshold, but my formulation frees the endpoint of all the state only when the client is doing something legal but silly.

Reviewer 2: I didn't have a specific limit in mind.  I might consider active_connection_id_limit as the number (which bounds the total number of things you need to remember to 2 times that as you might also need to remember connection IDs for active use as well).  So I don't think that you need to specify a limit, just say that endpoints need to track the highest sequence number that needs to be retired and a contiguous block of sequences numbers for which it will attempt to send RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames.  That block might start at the bottom of the overall block of sequence numbers that require retirement.

Reviewer 3: @martinthomson 
> I didn't have a specific limit in mind. I might consider active_connection_id_limit as the number (which bounds the total number of things you need to remember to 2 times that as you might also need to remember connection IDs for active use as well).

Thank you for the clarification. If that is the case, let my explain why I think `max_connection_id_limit * 2` is the correct value.

The draft currently allows an endpoint to request retirement of all the active CIDs that the peer retains at once. We explicitly define how the peer should behave in such case; see https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-transport.html#section-5.1.2-5. That means that the use of Retire Prior To might cause as much as *active_connection_id_limit* CIDs to be scheduled to be sent using RCID frames at once.

We also assume that the use of Retire Prior To is going to be infrequent.

Therefore, we need *active_connection_id_limit* in conjunction to the use of Retire Prior To.

Concurrently, the peer might be running business as usual, consuming CIDs as necessary. That means that we need some room for these too. We might argue that the active_connection_id_limit selected by the peer reflects the maximum pace that that peer is going to consume CIDs.

Based on this observation, my argument is that the sum of the two requirements makes sense; i.e. `max_connection_id_limit * 2`.

Reviewer 4: You can only retire as many as you store, so the only way you could have more than max_connection_id_limit RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames outstanding is if you need to retransmit all of them due to loss and subsequently you've both received a new connection ID AND need to retire it.  Retiring it because you decided to use it typically takes at least a round trip, so it's most likely the subsequent retiring is due to the peer's Retire Prior To increasing again.

Given the above situation starts looking increasingly like an attack(or a bug) and sending RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID quickly for the Retire Prior To case isn't critical, I'd suggest max_connecion_id_limit is a better recommendation.

Reviewer 4: How about we recommend limiting the number of RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames outstanding, but implementations SHOULD be willing to have at least max_connection_id_limit outstanding to allow a peer to retire all previously issued CIDs?

That isn't overly proscriptive, but gives a reasonable lower bound on how many implementations should allow.

Reviewer 3: Consider the case where  client has sent an RCID frame. The server has received that frame and has sent an NCID frame carrying a replacement. But that server has not sent an ACK yet, or the ACK it has sent has been lost.

At this moment, the server might decide to update the CID encryption key, and try to retire all the CIDs that has been provided to the client. When the NCID frame carrying the request to retire reaches the client, the client is now required to track retirement of `max_connection_id_limit + 1` CIDs.

I agree that this is a corner case. But our previous consensus has been to allow an endpoint to request retirement of all the CIDs that have been provided at once. Assuming that we want to retain that consensus, requiring endpoints to track *more* than `max_connection_id_limit` is IMO the logical choice.

The effect of *not* requiring that would be that an endpoint that decides to retire the CIDs that it has provided to the peer has to do retirement in multiple phases; e.g., first request retirement of half of them, wait for RCID frames, then retire the other half. That's much more complicated than just saying recommending endpoints to track something like `max_connection_id_limit * 2`.

Reviewer 4: I don't want to force retirement to be in multiple phases in edge cases like this, but I think it's fine to limit RCID to max_connection_id_limit outstanding frames.  Later, when some RCID frames get acknowledged, check if there are more CIDs that need retiring.  The case when the limit is exceeded needs to be handled in some way, so I'd rather have that code hit very infrequently than basically never.

An alternative I'd be ok with is to use max_connection_id_limit*2 and if the limit is exceeded, close the connection.  I don't see a problem with that, as we have limits like that already in our code, and it's very simple.  But it's fairly different from what we've been discussing.

Reviewer 3: > I don't want to force retirement to be in multiple phases in edge cases like this, but I think it's fine to limit RCID to max_connection_id_limit outstanding frames. Later, when some RCID frames get acknowledged, check if there are more CIDs that need retiring. The case when the limit is exceeded needs to be handled in some way, so I'd rather have that code hit very infrequently than basically never.

I think I agree that tracking 2*max_connection_id_limit of RCID frames in just one way taking care of these edge cases. I'm fine with leaving it up to the implementations how they would deal with this problem.

necessary state at the endpoint. For example, if an endpoint receives a Retire
Prior To field of 7 and has an advertised active_connection_id_limit of 4, it

> may cease sending any RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame with sequence number less than

Reviewer 4: Is this the functionality we want?  If we're going to go this direction, we might as well just say you don't need to send RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID for anything below Retire Prior To, and you can assume it'll be retired 'soon'.  Maybe that's a good solution anyway?

Author: The value of RCID is to let the receiver know that it will never receive a packet with that CID again, barring packet reordering. (one could use an ACK of NCID as an implicit signal, though we don't do that in QUIC). I think we want to preserve that. If the language I wrote puts clients in the situation where they're not getting all the RCIDs, it's because they are buggy, malicious, or in a pretty extreme corner case.

Moreover your suggestion is a wider departure from the spec, likely to create more problems for existing implementations.

Reviewer 2: This seems too concrete to me.

> 3.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
An endpoint MAY elect to limit the number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames
to bound the necessary state.  In order to allow a peer to retire all previously issued
connection IDs, this limit SHOULD be at least the active_connection_id_limit.
```

> Peers are discouraged from issuing updates of the Retire Prior To field before

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Peers SHOULD NOT issue updates of the Retire Prior To field before
```

receiving RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames for the previous update of Retire Prior
To. Doing so may result in the peer being uncertain if it is to receive

> additional packets with an old Connection ID.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To. Doing so may result in the peer being unwilling to immediately retire all the connection IDs, if retiring them would cause it to exceed its limit on outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames, as described above.
```

failures, as the issuing endpoint might be unable to continue using the
connection IDs with the active connection.

> An endpoint SHOULD elect to limit the number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An endpoint SHOULD limit the number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID
```

frames to bound the necessary state. In order to allow a peer to retire all
previously issued connection IDs, the limit on the number of outstanding
RETIRE_CONNECTION_IDs SHOULD be at least the active_connection_id_limit.  If the
number of outstanding RETIRE_CONNECTION_IDs exceeds twice the
active_connection_id_limit, the connection MAY be closed with a connection error

> of type CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RETIRE_CONNECTION_IDs SHOULD be at least the active_connection_id_limit.
```
That sentence is unnecessary.  If a peer starts forcing extra retirement, then this is no different than any of the multitude of other pathological behaviours they might exhibit.  It doesn't need special text.

Author: Well @ianswett just added the ERROR bit, so I'd like this input on this.

Reviewer 4: Assuming we move forward with this PR, this is what I intend our implementation to do.  I realize that 'A server's gotta do what a server's gotta do' but I'd prefer an explicit expectation for ease of debugging.

Reviewer 2: In that case, I would prefer something a little more terse and less prescriptive.

> An endpoint MAY choose to treat having too many connection IDs in need of retirement as a connection error of type CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR.

Endpoints SHOULD NOT issue updates of the Retire Prior To field before receiving
RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames for the previous update of Retire Prior To. Doing so
may result in the peer being unwilling to immediately retire all the connection
IDs, if retiring them would cause it to exceed its limit on outstanding

> RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames, as described above.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Endpoints SHOULD NOT issue updates of the Retire Prior To field before receiving
RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames for the previous update of Retire Prior To.
```
Rather than explain this and get the numbers right, just leave the recommendation.

failures, as the issuing endpoint might be unable to continue using the
connection IDs with the active connection.

An endpoint SHOULD limit the

> state it commits to retiring connection IDs using RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID by limiting the number of connection IDs that it tracks for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
state it commits to retiring connection IDs using RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID by
limiting the number of connection IDs that it tracks for
```

type CONNECTION_ID_LIMIT_ERROR.

Endpoints SHOULD NOT issue updates of the Retire Prior To field before receiving

> RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames that retire all connection IDs indicated by the previous Retire Prior To value.

Reviewer 5: Just wrapping:
```suggestion
RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames that retire all connection IDs indicated by the 
previous Retire Prior To value.
```
